\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@comment $Id: netcdf-install.texi,v 1.25 2004/12/16 18:18:16 ed Exp $
@c %**start of header
@setfilename netcdf-install.info
@settitle NetCDF Installation and Porting Guide
@setcontentsaftertitlepage
@c Combine the variable, concept, and function indices.
@synindex vr cp
@synindex fn cp
@c %**end of header

@c This file contains shared definitions of some vars.
@include defines.texi

@ifinfo
@dircategory netCDF scientific data format
@direntry
* netcdf-install: (netcdf-install).   @value{i-man}
@end direntry
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title @value{i-man}
@subtitle NetCDF Version @value{version}
@subtitle @value{update-month}
@author Russ Rew, John Caron, and Ed Hartnett
@author Unidata Program Center
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@ifnottex
@node Top, Quick Instructions for Installing NetCDF on Unix, (dir), (dir)
@top NetCDF Installation and Porting Guide

This document describes how to build and install the netCDF library,
version 3.6.0 and later, on Unix and Windows systems. Instructions for
installing earlier versions of netCDF can be found at
@uref{http://my.unidata.ucar.edu/content/software/netcdf/INSTALL_pre_360.html}.

For a complete description of the netCDF format and utilities see 
@ref{Top, @value{n-man},, netcdf, @value{n-man}}.

Programming guides are available for C (@pxref{Top,,, netcdf-c,
@value{c-man}}), C++ (@pxref{Top,,, netcdf-cxx, @value{cxx-man}}),
Fortran 77 (@pxref{Top,,, netcdf-f77, @value{f77-man}}), and Fortran
90 (@pxref{Top,,, netcdf-f90, @value{f90-man}}). All of these
documents are available from the netCDF website
@uref{@value{netcdf-url}}.

Separate documentation for the netCDF Java library can be found at the
netCDF-Java website, @uref{@value{netcdf-java-url}}.

To learn more about netCDF, see the netCDF website
@uref{@value{netcdf-url}}.

@end ifnottex

@menu
* Quick Instructions for Installing NetCDF on Unix::  
* Building and Installing NetCDF on Unix Systems::  
* Building and Installing NetCDF on Windows::  
* If Something Goes Wrong::     
* Combined Index::              

@detailmenu
 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Building and Installing NetCDF on Unix Systems

* Installation Requirements::   
* Specifying the Environment for Building::  
* Building on 64 Bit Platforms::  
* Running the configure Script::  
* Running make::                
* Testing the Build::           
* Installing NetCDF::           
* Platform Specific Notes::     
* Additional Porting Notes::    

Building and Installing NetCDF on Windows

* Getting Prebuilt DLL::        
* Installing the DLL::          
* Building the DLL with Visual Cplusplus 6::  
* Using the DLL with Visual Cplusplus 6::  
* Building the DLL with Visual Cplusplus NET::  
* Using the DLL with Visual Cplusplus NET::  

If Something Goes Wrong

* Troubleshooting::             
* Finding Help::                
* Reporting Problems::          

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Quick Instructions for Installing NetCDF on Unix, Building and Installing NetCDF on Unix Systems, Top, Top
@chapter Quick Instructions for Installing NetCDF on Unix
@cindex quick unix instructions

Who has time to read long installation manuals these days?

To install netCDF, uncompress and unpack the tar file, then change to
the src directory:

@example
gunzip netcdf-3_6_0.tar.gz
tar -xf netcdf-3_6_0.tar
cd netcdf-3_6_0/src
@end example

Now run the usual configure, make test, make install cycle:

@example
./configure
make test
make install
@end example

The configure script will try to find necessary tools in your
path. When you run configure you may optionally use the --prefix
argument to change the default installation directory. For, the
following will install the library in /usr/local/lib, the header
file in /usr/local/include, and the utilities in /usr/local/bin.

@example
./configure --prefix=/usr/local
@end example

The default install root is .. (i.e. the parent directory, which will
be netcdf-3_6_0). 

If all this doesn't work, then you might have to read the next
chapter. Better luck next time!

@node Building and Installing NetCDF on Unix Systems, Building and Installing NetCDF on Windows, Quick Instructions for Installing NetCDF on Unix, Top
@chapter Building and Installing NetCDF on Unix Systems
@cindex documents, latest version
@cindex binary releases
@cindex earlier netCDF versions

The latest version of this document is available at
@uref{@value{netcdf-url}INSTALL_beta/index.html}.

This document contains instructions for building and installing the
netCDF package from source on various platforms. Prebuilt binary
releases are (or soon will be) available for various platforms from
@uref{@value{netcdf-url}binaries.html}.

This document describes installation of version 3.6.0 (beta) of the
netCDF library, for information about installing earlier versions of
netCDF, see
@uref{@value{netcdf-url}INSTALL.html}.

@menu
* Installation Requirements::   
* Specifying the Environment for Building::  
* Building on 64 Bit Platforms::  
* Running the configure Script::  
* Running make::                
* Testing the Build::           
* Installing NetCDF::           
* Platform Specific Notes::     
* Additional Porting Notes::    
@end menu

@node Installation Requirements, Specifying the Environment for Building, Building and Installing NetCDF on Unix Systems, Building and Installing NetCDF on Unix Systems
@section Installation Requirements
@cindex installation requirements
@cindex large file tests requirements
@cindex extra_test requirements

Depending on the platform, you may need up to 25 Mbytes of free space
to unpack, build, and run the tests. You will also need a Standard C
compiler. If you have compilers for FORTRAN 77, FORTRAN 90, or C++,
the corresponding netCDF language interfaces may also be built and
tested. Compilers and associated tools will only be found if they are
in your path.

If you want to run the large file tests, you will need about 13 GB of
free disk space, as some very large files are created. The created
files are immediately deleted after the tests complete. These large
file tests are not run as part of the make test step; they are only
run for make extra_test.

If you wish to build from source on a Windows (Win32) platform,
different instructions apply. @xref{Building and Installing NetCDF on
Windows}.

To fully work with the netCDF source code, several extra utilities are
required to fully build everything from source. If you are going to
modify the netCDF source code, you will need some or all of the
following tools. All are freeware.

@ftable @code

@item m4
Macro processing language used heavily in libsrc, nc_test. Generates
(in these cases) C code from m4 source. Version 1.4 works fine with
release 3.5.1 and 3.6.0. 

@item nm
Lists contents of an ``object'' file. GNU nm does not mix well with
vendor compilers in the 64-bit world, so make sure that you are using
GNU nm with GNU compilers, or a vendor nm with your vendor
compiler. 

@item ar
Creates libraries. GNU ar does not mix well with vendor compilers in
the 64-bit world, so make sure that you are using GNU ar with GNU
compilers, or a vendor ar with your vendor compiler.

@end ftable

The following tools are not required to build netCDF. They may be
needed if you intend to work with the netCDF source code as a
developer. 

@ftable @code

@item flex and yacc
Used in ncgen directory to parse CDL files. Generates C files from .y
and .l files. You only need to use this to modify ncgen's understanding of
CDL grammar.

@item makeinfo
Generates all documentation formats (except man pages) from texinfo
source. I'm using makeinfo version 4.2, as of release 3.6.0. If you
have trouble with makeinfo, upgrade to at least 4.2 and try again. You
only need makeinfo if you want to modify the documentation.

@item autoconf
Generates the configure script. Autoconf is only needed to modify the
configure script. Version 2.59 or later is required. Automake is not
used with netCDF version 3.6.

@end ftable

The most recent version of all netCDF documents can always be found at
the netCDF website. @uref{@value{netcdf-url}}.

@node Specifying the Environment for Building, Building on 64 Bit Platforms, Installation Requirements, Building and Installing NetCDF on Unix Systems
@section Specifying the Environment for Building

The netCDF configure script will set some environment variables that
are important for building from source code. It is only necessary to
set them to override default behavior.

The netCDF configure script searches your path to find the compilers
and tools it needed. To use compilers that can't be found in your
path, set their environment variables.

When finding compilers, vendor compilers will be preferred to GNU
compilers. Not because we don't like GNU, but because we assume if you
purchased a compiler, you want to use it. Setting CC allows you to
over-ride this preference. (Alternatively, you could temporarily
remove the compiler's directories from your PATH.)

For example, on an AIX system, configure will first search for xlc,
the AIX compiler. If not found, it will try gcc, the GNU compiler. To
override this behavior, set CC to gcc (in sh: export CC=gcc). (But
don't forget to also set CXX to g++, or else configure will try and
use xlC, the AIX C++ compiler.)

By default, the netCDF library is built with assertions turned on. If
you wish to turn off assertions, set CPPFLAGS to -DNDEBUG (csh ex:
setenv CPPFLAGS -DNDEBUG).

Variable Description Notes 

@multitable @columnfractions .20 .20 .60

@item CC 
@tab C compiler 
@tab If you don't specify this, the configure script will try to
find a suitable C compiler such as cc, c89, xlc, or gcc. 

@item FC 
@tab Fortran compiler (if any) 
@tab If you don't specify this, the configure script will try to find a
suitable Fortran 90 or Fortran 77 compiler. Set FC to "" explicitly,
if no Fortran interface is desired.

@item F90 
@tab Fortran 90 compiler (if any) 
@tab If you don't specify this, the configure script will try to find a
suitable Fortran 90 compiler. Not needed if FC specifies a Fortran 90
compiler. Set F90 to "" explicitly, if no Fortran 90 interface
desired. For a vendor F90 compiler, make sure you're using the same
vendor's F77 compiler. Using Fortran compilers from different vendors, or
mixing vendor compilers with g77, the GNU F77 compiler, is not
supported and may not work.

@item CXX 
@tab C++ compiler 
@tab If you don't specify this, the configure script will try to find a
suitable C++ compiler. Set CXX to "" explicitly, if no C++ interface
is desired. If using a vendor C++ compiler, use that vendor's C
compiler to compile the C interface. Using different vendor compilers
for C and C++ may not work.

@item CFLAGS 
@tab C compiler flags 
@tab "-O" or "-g", for example.

@item CPPFLAGS 
@tab C preprocessor options 
@tab "-DNDEBUG" to omit assertion checks, for example.

@item FFLAGS 
@tab Fortran compiler flags 
@tab "-O" or "-g", for example.

@item F90FLAGS 
@tab Fortran 90 compiler flags 
@tab "-O" or "-g", for example. If you don't specify this, the value of
FFLAGS will be used.

@item CXXFLAGS 
@tab C++ compiler flags 
@tab "-O" or "-g", for example.

@item ARFLAGS, NMFLAGS, FPP, M4FLAGS, LIBS, FLIBS, FLDFLAGS  
@tab Miscellaneous 
@tab One or more of these were needed for some platforms, as specified
below. Unless specified, you should not set these environment
variables, because that may interfere with the configure script.

@end multitable

The section marked Tested Systems below contains a list of systems on
which we have built this package, the environment variable settings we
used, and additional commentary.

@node Building on 64 Bit Platforms, Running the configure Script, Specifying the Environment for Building, Building and Installing NetCDF on Unix Systems
@section Building on 64 Bit Platforms
@cindex 64-bit platforms
@cindex SunOS 64-bit build
@cindex AIX 64-bit build

Some platforms support special options to build in 64-bit mode. 

NetCDF 3.6.0 beta has been tested as 64-bit builds on SunOS and
AIX. The options needed to build in 64-bit mode are described here.

@table @code

@item AIX
Set -q64 option in all compilers, and set NMFLAGS to -X32, and ARFLAGS
to '-X32 cru'. Alternatively, set environment variable OBJECT_MODE to
64 before running configure.

@item IRIX 
Set the -64 option in all compilers.

@item SunOS
Use the -xarch=v9 flag on all compilers. This is not supported on the x86 platform.
@end table

@node Running the configure Script, Running make, Building on 64 Bit Platforms, Building and Installing NetCDF on Unix Systems
@section Running the configure Script
@cindex configure, running
@cindex running configure
@cindex install directory
@cindex prefix argument of configure
@cindex config.log

To create the Makefiles needed to build netCDF, you must run the
provided configure script. Go to the top-level netCDF src/ directory.

Decide where you want to install this package. Use this for the
"--prefix=" argument to the configure script below. The default
installation prefix is "..", which will install the package's files in
../bin, ../lib, and ../man relative to the netCDF src/ directory.

Execute the configure script:

@example
    ./configure --prefix=whatever_you_decided
@end example

The "--prefix=..." specification is optional; if omitted, ".."
designating the parent directory will be used as a default.

The configure script will examine your computer system -- checking for
attributes that are relevant to building the netCDF package. It will
print to standard output the checks that it makes and the results that
it finds.

The configure script will also create the file "config.log", which
will contain error messages from the utilities that the configure
script uses in examining the attributes of your system. Because such
an examination can result in errors, it is expected that "config.log"
will contain error messages. Therefore, such messages do not
necessarily indicate a problem (a better indicator would be failure of
the subsequent "make"). One exception, however, is an error message in
"config.log" that indicates that a compiler could not be started. This
indicates a severe problem in your compilation environment -- one that
you must fix.

@node Running make, Testing the Build, Running the configure Script, Building and Installing NetCDF on Unix Systems
@section Running make
@cindex make, running
@cindex running make

Run "make". This will build one or more netCDF libraries. It will
build the basic netCDF library libsrc/libnetcdf.a. If you have Fortran
77 or Fortran 90 compilers, then the Fortran interfaces will be
included in this library. If you have a C++ compiler, then the C++
interface will be built into the library cxx/libnetcdf_c++.a. This
will also build the netCDF utilities ncgen(1) and ncdump(1).

Run make like this:
@example
make
@end example

@node Testing the Build, Installing NetCDF, Running make, Building and Installing NetCDF on Unix Systems
@section Testing the Build
@cindex tests, running
@cindex make test
@cindex make extra_test
@cindex extra_test, running
@cindex large file tests

Run "make test" to verify that the netCDF library and executables have
been built properly. This will build and run various test programs
that test the C, Fortran, and C++ interfaces as well as the "ncdump"
and "ncgen" utility programs. Lines in the output beginning with "***"
report on success or failure of the tests; any failures will be
reported before halting the test. Compiler and linker warnings during
the testing may be ignored.

Run the tests like this:

@example
make test
@end example

If you plan to use the 64-bit offset format (introduced in version
3.6.0) to create very large files (i.e. larger than 2 GB), you should
probably run ``make extra_test'' which tests the large file
features. You must have 13 GB of free disk space for these tests to
successfully run. (The test files are deleted when the test
completes, so you get your disk space back.) You may wish to et
environment variable TEMP_LARGE to a directory to which large files
can be written. (For example, in csh: setenv TEMP_LARGE /ptmp/edh).

Run the large file tests like this:

@example
make extra_test
@end example

If the tests fail @xref{If Something Goes Wrong}.

@node Installing NetCDF, Platform Specific Notes, Testing the Build, Building and Installing NetCDF on Unix Systems
@section Installing NetCDF
@cindex make install
@cindex installing netCDF

To install the libraries and executables, run "make install". This
will install to the directory specified in the configure step, or to
../lib (that is, it will create a lib directory under the netcdf-3.6.0
directory, and install the library there.)

Run the installation like this:

@example
make install
@end example

Try linking your applications. Let us know if you have problems
(@pxref{Reporting Problems}). Port the library to other
platforms. Share data.

@node Platform Specific Notes, Additional Porting Notes, Installing NetCDF, Building and Installing NetCDF on Unix Systems
@section Platform Specific Notes

The following platform-specific note may be helpful when building and
installing netCDF. Consult your vendor manuals for information about
the options listed here. Compilers can change from version to version;
the following information may not apply to your platform.

Full output from some of the platforms of the test platforms for
netCDF @value{version} can be found at @uref{@value{netcdf-builds}}.

@subsection AIX

We found the vendor compilers in /usr/vac/bin, and included this 
in our PATH. Compilers were xlc, xlf, xlf90, xlC.

The F90 compiler requires the qsuffix option to believe that F90 code
files can end with .f90. This is automatically turned on by configure
when needed (we hope):
@example
    F90FLAGS=-qsuffix=f=f90
@end example

To compile 64-bit code, set the environment variable OBJECT_MODE to
64, or use the -q64 option on all AIX compilers by setting CFLAGS,
FFLAGS, and CXXFLAGS to -q64.

The following is also necessary on an IBM AIX SP system for 64-bit
mode:
@example
    ARFLAGS='-X64 cru'
    NMFLAGS='-X64'
@end example

There are thread-safe versions of the AIX compilers. For example,
xlc_r is the thread-safe C compiler. The NetCDF configure script
ignores these compilers. To use thread-safe compilers, override the
configure script by setting CC to xlc_r; similarly for FC and CXX.

For large file support, AIX requires that the macro _LARGE_FILES be
defined. The configure script does this using
AC_SYS_LARGEFILES. Unfortunately, this misfires when OBJECT_MODE is
64, or the q64 option is used. The netCDF tries to fix this by turning
on _LARGE_FILES anyway in these cases.

The GNU C compiler does not mix successfully with the AIX fortran
compilers. 

@subsection Cygwin

NetCDF builds under Cygwin tools on Windows just as with Linux.

@subsection HPUX

The HP Fortran compiler (f77, a.k.a. fort77) requires FLIBS to include
-lU77 for the fortran tests to work. The configure script does this
automatically.

For the c89 compiler to work, CPPFLAGS must include
-D_HPUX_SOURCE. This isn't required for the cc compiler. The configure
script adds this as necessary.

For large file support, HP-UX requires _FILE_OFFSET_BITS=64. The
configure script sets this automatically.

The HPUX C++ compiler doesn't work on netCDF code. It's too old for
that. So either use GNU to compile netCDF, or skip the C++ code by
setting CXX to '' (in csh: setenv CXX '').

Building a 64 bit version may be possible with the following settings:
@example
    CC=/bin/cc
    CPPFLAGS='-D_HPUX_SOURCE -D_FILE_OFFSET_BITS=64'    # large file support
    CFLAGS='-g +DD64'                           # 64-bit mode
    FC=/opt/fortran90/bin/f90                   # Fortran-90 compiler
    FFLAGS='-w +noppu +DA2.0W'                  # 64-bit mode, no "_" suffixes
    FLIBS=-lU77
    CXX=''                                      # no 64-bit mode C++ compiler
@end example

@subsection Irix

A 64-bit version can be built by setting CFLAGS, FFLAGS, and CXXFLAGS
to -64.

On our machine, there is a /bin/cc and a /usr/bin/cc, and the -64
option only works with the former.

@subsection Linux

The f2cFortran flag is required with GNU fortran:
@example
    CPPFLAGS=-Df2cFortran
@end example

For Portland Group Fortran, set pgiFortran instead:
@example
    CPPFLAGS=-DpgiFortran
@end example

Portland Group F90/F95 does not mix with GNU g77.

The netCDF configure script should notice which fortran compiler is
being used, and set these automatically.

For large file support, _FILE_OFFSET_BITS must be set to 64. The
netCDF configure script should set this automatically.

@subsection Macintosh

The f2cFortran flag is required with GNU fortran
(CPPFLAGS=-Df2cFortran). The NetCDF configure script should and set
this automatically.

For IBM compilers on the Mac, the following may work (we lack this
test environment):
@example
    CC=/usr/bin/cc
    CPPFLAGS=-DIBMR2Fortran
    FC=xlf
    F90=xlf90
    F90FLAGS=-qsuffix=cpp=f90
@end example

@subsection OSF1

NetCDF builds out of the box on OSF1.

@subsection SunOS

PATH should contain /usr/ccs/bin to find make, nm, ar, etc.

For large file support, _FILE_OFFSET_BITS must be 64. Configure will
turn this on automatically.

Large file support doesn't work with c89, unless the -Xa option is
used. The netCDF configure script turns this on automatically where
appropriate.

To compile in 64-bit mode, use option -xarch=v9 on all compilers
(i.e. in CFLAGS, FFLAGS, and CXXFLAGS).

When compiling with GNU Fortran (g77), the -Df2cFortran flag is
required for the Fortran interface to work. The NetCDF configure
script turns this on automatically if needed.

@node Additional Porting Notes,  , Platform Specific Notes, Building and Installing NetCDF on Unix Systems
@section Additional Porting Notes
@cindex GNU make
@cindex porting notes, additional
@cindex CRAY, porting to
@cindex ncconfig.h
@cindex ncconfig.in
@cindex ncconfig.inc
@cindex ncio
@cindex ncx.m4
@cindex ffio.c
@cindex posixio.c
@cindex big endian
@cindex little endian

The configure and build system should work on any system which has a
modern "sh" shell, "make", and so on. The configure and build system
is less portable than the "C" code itself, however. You may run into
problems with the "include" syntax in the Makefiles. You can use GNU
make to overcome this, or simply manually include the specified files
after running configure.

If you can't run the configure script, you will need to create
libsrc/ncconfig.h and fortran/nfconfig.inc. Start with
libsrc/ncconfig.in and fortran/nfconfig.in and set the defines as
appropriate for your system.

Operating system dependency is isolated in the "ncio" module. We
provide two versions. posixio.c uses POSIX system calls like "open()",
"read()" and "write().  ffio.c uses a special library available on
CRAY systems. You could create other versions for different operating
systems. The program "t_ncio.c" can be used as a simple test of this
layer.

Numerical representation dependency is isolated in the "ncx"
module. As supplied, ncx.m4 (ncx.c) supports IEEE floating point
representation, VAX floating point, and CRAY floating
point. BIG_ENDIAN vs LITTLE_ENDIAN is handled, as well as various
sizes of "int", "short", and "long". We assume, however, that a "char"
is eight bits.

There is a separate implementation of the ncx interface available as
ncx_cray.c which contains optimizations for CRAY vector
architectures. Move the generic ncx.c out of the way and rename
ncx_cray.c to ncx.c to use this module. By default, this module does
not use the IEG2CRAY and CRAY2IEG library calls. When compiled with
aggressive in-lining and optimization, it provides equivalent
functionality with comparable speed and clearer error semantics. If
you wish to use the IEG library functions, compile this module with
-DUSE_IEG.

@node Building and Installing NetCDF on Windows, If Something Goes Wrong, Building and Installing NetCDF on Unix Systems, Top
@chapter Building and Installing NetCDF on Windows
@cindex windows, building on
@cindex VC++
@cindex NET
@cindex DLL
@cindex Microsoft

NetCDF can be built and used from a variety of development
environments on Windows. The netCDF library is implemented as a
Windows dynamic link library (DLL). The simplest way to get started
with netCDF under Windows is to download the pre-built DLL from the
Unidata web site.

Instructions are also given for building the netCDF DLL from the
source code.

VC++ documentation being so voluminous, finding the right information
can be a chore. There's a good discussion of using DLLs called ``About
Dynamic-Link Libraries'' at (perhaps)
@uref{http://msdn.microsoft.com/library/default.asp?url=/library/en-us/dllproc/base/dynamic_link_libraries.asp}.

From the .NET point of view, the netCDF dll is unmanaged code. As a
starting point, see the help topic ``Consuming Unmanaged DLL
Functions'' which may be found at
@uref{http://msdn.microsoft.com/library/default.asp?url=/library/en-us/cpguide/html/cpconConsumingUnmanagedDLLFunctions.asp}.

@menu
* Getting Prebuilt DLL::        
* Installing the DLL::          
* Building the DLL with Visual Cplusplus 6::  
* Using the DLL with Visual Cplusplus 6::  
* Building the DLL with Visual Cplusplus NET::  
* Using the DLL with Visual Cplusplus NET::  
@end menu

@node Getting Prebuilt DLL, Installing the DLL, Building and Installing NetCDF on Windows, Building and Installing NetCDF on Windows
@section Getting Prebuilt netcdf.dll
@cindex binaries, windows
@cindex dll, getting

We have pre-built Win32 binary versions of the netcdf dll and static
library, as well as ncgen.exe and ncdump.exe (dll and static
versions). You can get them from
@uref{@value{windows-ftp-site}netcdf-3.5.0.win32bin.zip}.
(Note: we don't have a C++ interface here).

@node Installing the DLL, Building the DLL with Visual Cplusplus 6, Getting Prebuilt DLL, Building and Installing NetCDF on Windows
@section Installing the DLL
@cindex netcdf.dll, location
@cindex netcdf.lib
@cindex ncgen, windows location
@cindex ncdump, windows location

Whether you get the pre-built DLL or build your own, you'll then have
to install it somewhere so that your other programs can find it and
use it.

There are standard places to put DLLs, the Windows\System folder
(Windows 98/ME) or Windows\System32 folder (Windows2000/XP), or you
can leave them wherever you want, and every development project that
uses the dll will have to be told to search the netCDF directory when
it's linking.

On the .NET platform, there is also the global assembly cache (see
MSDN topic ``Global Assembly Cache'').  

Following Windows conventions, the netCDF files belong in the
following places:

@multitable @columnfractions .25 .50 .25

@item File(s) @tab Description @tab Location

@item netcdf.dll @tab C and Fortran function in DLL 
@tab Windows\System (98/ME) or Windows\System32 (2000/XP)

@item netcdf.lib @tab Library file?
@tab Windows\System (98/ME) or Windows\System32 (2000/XP)

@item ncgen.exe, ncdump.exe @tab NetCDF utilities
@tab Windows\System (98/ME) or Windows\System32 (2000/XP)

@item netcdf-3\src @tab netCDF source code
@tab Program Files\Unidata

@end multitable

@node Building the DLL with Visual Cplusplus 6, Using the DLL with Visual Cplusplus 6, Installing the DLL, Building and Installing NetCDF on Windows
@section Building netcdf.dll with VC++ 6.0
@cindex VC++ 6.0, building with

To build the library yourself, get the file 
@value{windows-ftp-site}netcdf-3.5.0.win32make.VC6.zip

The makefiles there describe how to build netcdf-3.5
using the using Microsoft Visual C++ 6.x and (optionally)
Digital Visual Fortran 6.x. Because of difficulties in getting
Microsoft Visual Studio to fall in line with our existing
source directory scheme, we chose _not_ to build the system
"inside" Visual Studio. Instead, we provide a simple group
of "msoft.mak" files which can be used. If you
wish to work in Visual Studio, go ahead. Read the
section called "Macros" at the end of this discussion.

As of this writing, we have not tried compiling the
C++ interface in this environment.

nmake is a Microsoft version of make, which comes with VC 6.0 (and VC
7.0) in directory C:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual Studio\VC98\Bin
(or, for VC 7.0, C:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual Studio .NET
2003\Vc7\bin).

To build netcdf, proceed as follows:

@table @code

@item unpack source distribution.

@item copy netcdf-3.5.0.win32make.VC6.zip 
copy netcdf-3.5.0.win32make.VC6.zip into the netcdf-3.5.0/src
directory, and unzip it from there.

@item cd src\libsrc; nmake /f msoft.mak
Run this command in src\libsrc. This will build netcdf.lib and
netcdf.dll Note: This makefiles make DLLs. To make static libraries
see section on static libraries.

@item nmake /f msoft.mak test
Optionally, in src\libsrc, make and run the simple test.

@item cd ..\fortran; nmake /f msoft.mak
Optionally build the fortran interface and rebuild dll in ..\libsrc to
include the fortran interface. Note Bene: We don't provide a .DEF
file, so this step changes the "ordinals" by which entry points in the
DLL found. Some sites may wish to modify the msoft.mak file(s) to
produce a separate library for the fortran interface.

@item nmake /f msoft.mak test
(necessary if you want to use fortran code) While you are in
src\fortran; nmake /f msoft.mak test This tests the netcdf-2 fortran
interface.

@item cd ..\nctest; nmake /f msoft.mak test
(optional, but recommended) In src\nctest; nmake /f msoft.mak test
This tests the netcdf-2 C interface.

@item cd ..\nc_test; nmake /f msoft.mak test
(optional, but highly recommended) In src\nc_test; nmake /f msoft.mak
test This tortures the netcdf-3 C interface.

@item cd ..\nf_test; nmake /f msoft.mak test
(optional, but highly recommended if you built the fortran interface)
In src\nf_test; nmake /f msoft.mak test This tortures the netcdf-3
fortran interface.

@item ..\ncdump; nmake /f msoft.mak
In src\ncdump; nmake /f msoft.mak This makes ncdump.exe.

@item ..\ncgen; nmake /f msoft.mak
In src\ncgen; nmake /f msoft.mak This makes ncgen.exe.

@item ..\ncdump; nmake /f msoft.mak test
(optional) In src\ncdump; nmake /f msoft.mak test This tests
ncdump. Both ncgen and ncdump need to be built prior to this
test. Note the makefile sets the path so that ..\libsrc\netcdf.dll can
be located.

@item ..\ncgen; nmake /f msoft.mak test
(optional) In src\ncgen; nmake /f msoft.mak test This tests
ncgen. Both ncgen and ncdump need to be built prior to this test. Note
the makefile sets the path so that ..\libsrc\netcdf.dll can be
located.

@item To Install
Copy libsrc\netcdf.lib to a LIBRARY directory.
Copy libsrc\netcdf.h and fortran/netcdf.inc to an INCLUDE directory.
Copy libsrc\netcdf.dll, ncdump/ncdump.exe, and ncgen/ncgen.exe to
a BIN directory (someplace in your PATH).

@end table

@node Using the DLL with Visual Cplusplus 6, Building the DLL with Visual Cplusplus NET, Building the DLL with Visual Cplusplus 6, Building and Installing NetCDF on Windows
@section Using netcdf.dll with VC++ 6.0
@cindex VC++ 6.0, using netcdf with

To use the netcdf.dll:

1. Place these in your include directory:
	netcdf.h		C include file
	netcdf.inc		Fortran include file

2a. To use the Dynamic Library (shared) version of the netcdf library:
  Place these in a directory that's in your PATH:
	netcdf.dll		library dll
	ncgen.exe		uses the dll
	ncdump.exe		uses the dll

  Place this in a library directory to link against:
	netcdf.lib		library

2b. Alternatively, to use a static version of the library 

  Place this in a library directory to link against:
	netcdfs.lib		library
 
  Place these in a directory that's in your PATH:
	ncgens.exe		statically linked (no DLL needed)
	ncdumps.exe		statically linked (no DLL needed)

@node Building the DLL with Visual Cplusplus NET, Using the DLL with Visual Cplusplus NET, Using the DLL with Visual Cplusplus 6, Building and Installing NetCDF on Windows
@section Building netcdf.dll with VC++.NET
@cindex VC++.NET, building with

To build the netCDF dll with VC++.NET open the win32/NET/netcdf.sln
file with Visual Studio. Both Debug and Release configurations are
available - select one and build.

The resulting netcdf.dll file will be in subdirectory Release or
Debug. 

The netCDF tests will be built and run as part of the build
process. The Fortran 77 interface will be built, but not the Fortran
90 or C++ interfaces.

@node Using the DLL with Visual Cplusplus NET,  , Building the DLL with Visual Cplusplus NET, Building and Installing NetCDF on Windows
@section Using netcdf.dll with VC++.NET
@cindex VC++.NET, using netcdf with
@cindex visual studio 2003 properties

Load-time linking to the DLL is the most straightforward from
C++. This means the netcdf.lib file has to end up on the compile
command line. This being Windows, that's hidden by a GUI.

In Visual Studio 2003 this can be done by modifying three of the
project's properties. 

Open the project properties window from the project menu. Go to the
linker folder and look at the general properties. Modify the property
``Additional Library Directories'' by adding the directory which
contains the netcdf.dll and netcdf.lib files.  Now go to the linker's
input properties and set the property ``Additional Dependencies'' to
netcdf.lib.

Finally, still within the project properties window, go to the C/C++
folder, and look at the general properties. Modify ``Additional
Include Directories'' to add the directory with the netcdf.h file.

Now use the netCDF functions in your C++ code. Of course any C or C++
file that wants to use the functions will need:

@example
#include <netcdf.h>
@end example

@node If Something Goes Wrong, Combined Index, Building and Installing NetCDF on Windows, Top
@chapter If Something Goes Wrong

The netCDF package is designed to build and install on a wide variety
of platforms, but doesn't always. When the automatic install doesn't
work, first see if the problem is something obvious
(@pxref{Troubleshooting}). If that doesn't help, try seeing if your
problem has already been solved by someone else (@pxref{Finding
Help}). If that doesn't help, report your problem to Unidata, but
please make sure you submit all the information we need to help
(@pxref{Reporting Problems}).

@menu
* Troubleshooting::             
* Finding Help::                
* Reporting Problems::          
@end menu

@node Troubleshooting, Finding Help, If Something Goes Wrong, If Something Goes Wrong
@section Troubleshooting
@cindex troubleshooting
@cindex turning off C++, Fortran interface

If the ./configure;make test fails, it's a good idea to turn off the
C++ and Fortran interfaces, and try to build the C interface
alone. All other interfaces depend on the C interface, so nothing else
will work until the C interface works. To turn off C++ and Fortran,
set environment variables CXX and FC to NULL before running the netCDF
configure script (with csh: setenv FC '';setenv CXX '').

If the netCDF configure fails, most likely the problem is with your
development environment. The configure script looks through your path to
find all the tools it needs to build netCDF, including C compiler and
linker, the ar, ranlib, and others. The configure script will tell
your what tools it's found, and where they are on your system. Here's
part of configure's output on a Linux machine:

@example
checking CPPFLAGS...  -Df2cFortran
checking CC CFLAGS... cc -g
checking which cc... /usr/bin/cc
checking CXX... c++
checking CXXFLAGS... -g -O2
checking which c++... /usr/local/bin/c++
checking FC... f77
checking FFLAGS... 
checking which f77... /usr/bin/f77
checking F90... unset
checking AR... ar
checking ARFLAGS... cru
checking which ar... /usr/bin/ar
checking NM... nm
checking NMFLAGS... 
checking which nm... /usr/bin/nm
checking RANLIB... ranlib
checking RANLIBFLAGS... 
checking which ranlib... /usr/bin/ranlib
@end example

Make sure that the tools, directories, and flags are set to reasonable
values, and compatible tools. For example the GNU tools may not
inter-operate well with vendor tools. If you're using a vendor
compiler, use the ar, nm, and ranlib that the vendor supplied.

As configure runs, it creates a config.log file. If configure crashes,
do a text search of config.log for thing it was checking before
crashing. If you have a licensing or tool compatibility problem, it
will be obvious in config.log.

If the configure script runs, but the compile step doesn't work, or
the tests don't complete successfully, the problem is probably in your
CFLAGS or CPPFLAGS. 

If you are planning on using large files (i.e. > 2 GiB), then make
sure you run make extra_test to ensure that large files work on your
system. 

@node Finding Help, Reporting Problems, Troubleshooting, If Something Goes Wrong
@section Finding Help On-line
@cindex mailing lists

The replies to all netCDF support emails are on-line and can be
searched. Before reporting a problem to Unidata, please search this
on-line database to see if your problem has already been addressed in
a support email. 

To search the support database, see @uref{netcdf-support-search-url}.

The netCDF mailing list also can be searched; see
@uref{netcdf-list-search-url}.

@node Reporting Problems,  , Finding Help, If Something Goes Wrong
@section Reporting Problems
@cindex bugs, reporting
@cindex problems, reporting
@cindex reporting problems

To help us solve your problem, please include the following
information in your email to @value{netcdf-support-email}. 

Unfortunately, we can't solve build questions without this
information; if you ask for help without providing it, we're just
going to have to ask for it.

So why not send it immediately, and save us both the extra trouble?

@enumerate

@item the exact version of netCDF - see the src/VERSION file.

@item the *complete* output of ./configure, make, and make test. Yes,
it's long, but it's all important. 

@item if the configure failed, the contents of config.log.

@item if you are having problems with very large files (larger than
2GiB), the output of make extra_test.

@end enumerate

@contents
 
@node Combined Index,  , If Something Goes Wrong, Top
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye
End:
